Walkthrough
===========

First let’s import pylab, Meshoid, and the load_from_snapshot script for
loading GIZMO outputs.

.. code:: ipython3

    from matplotlib import pyplot as plt
    import numpy as np
    from meshoid import Meshoid
    from load_from_snapshot import load_from_snapshot
    %matplotlib inline

Now let’s load some of the gas data fields from a snapshot in the public
FIRE data release using load_from_snapshot. In this case we’ll perform a
density cut at n_H ~ .1 cm^-3 to narrow it down to just the ISM.

.. code:: ipython3

    from os import system
    from os.path import isfile
    
    # download the data - feel free to use your own snapshots!
    for i in range(4):
        if not isfile(f"./snapshot_600.{i}.hdf5"):
            system(f"wget -r -nH --cut-dirs=6 --no-parent --reject='index.html*' -e robots=off https://users.flatironinstitute.org/~mgrudic/fire2_public_release/core/m12i_res7100/output/snapdir_600/snapshot_600.{i}.hdf5")
    
    rho = load_from_snapshot("Density", 0, ".", 600)
    RHO_TO_NH = 300 # convert to H number density (approx)
    density_cut = (rho*RHO_TO_NH > .01)
    pdata = {}
    fields_to_load = "Masses", "Coordinates", "SmoothingLength", "Velocities", "Density"
    pdata = {field: load_from_snapshot(field, 0, ".", 600, particle_mask=np.arange(len(rho))[density_cut]) for field in fields_to_load}

Finally, before getting to the meshoid stuff we will also center the
coordinates, perform a cut in galactocentric radius at 40kpc, and orient
our coordinates to the principal axes of the gas distribution.

.. code:: ipython3

    # do centering
    pos = pdata["Coordinates"]
    center = np.median(pos,axis=0)
    pos -= center
    
    # do radius cut
    MAX_RADIUS = 40.
    radius_cut = np.sum(pos*pos,axis=1) < MAX_RADIUS * MAX_RADIUS
    pos, mass, hsml, v, rho = pos[radius_cut], pdata["Masses"][radius_cut], pdata["SmoothingLength"][radius_cut], pdata["Velocities"][radius_cut], pdata["Density"][radius_cut]
    center_new = np.average(pos,axis=0,weights=mass) # now do another re-centering
    center += center_new
    pos -= center_new
    
    # now get the principal axes - eigenvectors of the second mass moment matrix
    cov_pos = np.cov(pos.T, aweights=mass)
    w, coordinate_basis = np.linalg.eigh(cov_pos)
    coordinate_basis = coordinate_basis[:,w.argsort()[::-1]] # sort so the smallest moment axis is the last = z-axis
    pos = pos @ coordinate_basis # dot product with each basis vector to get coordinates in new basis

OK, now let’s start by making a map of gas surface density. We can do so
by generating a Meshoid object from the particle masses, coordinates,
and smoothing lengths, and then calling the SurfaceDensity method. This
function is useful for giving kernel-weighted projected quantities on a
Cartesion grid of sighlines.

Meshoid can also adaptively compute particle smoothing lengths
on-the-fly provided only the coordinates, but it requires a
nearest-neighbor search that takes a while so it’s best to provide the
smoothing length when you can.

.. code:: ipython3

    import matplotlib.colors as colors
    from mpl_toolkits.axes_grid1 import make_axes_locatable
    
    M = Meshoid(pos, mass, hsml)
    rmax = 20
    res = 1024
    X = Y = np.linspace(-rmax, rmax, res)
    X, Y = np.meshgrid(X, Y, indexing='ij')
    fig, ax = plt.subplots(figsize=(6,6))
    sigma_gas_msun_pc2 = M.SurfaceDensity(M.m,center=np.array([0,0,0]),size=40.,res=res)*1e4
    p = ax.pcolormesh(X, Y, sigma_gas_msun_pc2, norm=colors.LogNorm(vmin=.1,vmax=1e3))
    divider = make_axes_locatable(ax)
    cax = divider.append_axes("right", size="5%", pad=0.0)
    fig.colorbar(p,label=r"$\Sigma_{\rm gas}$ $(\rm M_\odot\,pc^{-2})$",pad=0,cax=cax)
    ax.set_aspect('equal')
    ax.set_xlabel("X (kpc)")
    ax.set_ylabel("Y (kpc)")
    plt.tight_layout(h_pad=1)
    plt.show()



.. image:: MeshoidTest_files/MeshoidTest_7_0.png


Now let’s look at the 3D gas density in a slice through the galaxy,
using the Slice method. This will reconstruct the data to a grid of
points in a plane slicing through the data. You can chose the order of
the reconstruction: 0 will simply give the value of the nearest particle
(i.e. reflecting the Voronoi domains), 1 will perform a linear
reconstruction from that particle, etc. The best order will depend upon
the nature of the data: smooth data will look best with higher-order
reconstructions, while messier data will have nasty overshoots and
artifacts. Here the density field is quite poorly-resolved, so we will
use a 0’th order reconstruction.

.. code:: ipython3

    fig, ax = plt.subplots(figsize=(6,6))
    density_slice_nHcgs = M.Slice(rho,center=np.array([0,0,0]),size=40.,res=res, order=0) * RHO_TO_NH
    # alternative to try: default linear reconstruction of log rho to avoid overshoot to negative density
    #density_slice_nHcgs = 10**M.Slice(np.log10(rho),center=np.array([0,0,0]),size=40.,res=res) * RHO_TO_NH
    p = ax.pcolormesh(X, Y, density_slice_nHcgs,norm=colors.LogNorm(vmin=.01,vmax=1e2))
    ax.set_aspect('equal')
    divider = make_axes_locatable(ax)
    cax = divider.append_axes("right", size="5%", pad=0.0)
    fig.colorbar(p,label=r"$n_{\rm H}$ $(\rm cm^{-3})$",cax=cax)
    ax.set_xlabel("X (kpc)")
    ax.set_ylabel("Y (kpc)")
    plt.show()



.. image:: MeshoidTest_files/MeshoidTest_9_0.png


Simple Radiative Transfer
=========================

Meshoid is also capable of performing radiative transfer with a known
emissivity/source function and opacity, neglecting scattering. For
example, we can load in the stellar positions and assume a simple
constant mass-to-light ratio, and calculate the dust-extincted starlight
in the V-band.

.. code:: ipython3

    from meshoid.radiation import radtransfer, dust_abs_opacity
    from astropy import units as u, constants as c
    kappa_dust_codeunits = dust_abs_opacity(0.555) * (u.cm**2/u.g).to(u.kpc**2/(1e10*c.M_sun)) # dust opacity in cgs converted to solar - evaluated at 555nm
    kappa_gas = np.repeat(kappa_dust_codeunits,len(mass)) 
    j_gas = np.zeros_like(mass) # assume dust does not emit
    
    # have to get the star properties now
    x_stars = (load_from_snapshot("Coordinates", 4, ".", 600) - center) @ coordinate_basis
    m_stars = load_from_snapshot("Masses", 4, ".", 600)
    h_star = np.repeat(0.1, len(m_stars)) # 100pc radii
    MASS_TO_LIGHT_SOLAR = 1. # emissivity is just the light-to-mass ratio for stars - here assume 1 (old-ish stellar population in V-band)
    j_star = np.repeat(1e10/(MASS_TO_LIGHT_SOLAR), len(m_stars)) # we are assuming a constant emissivity throughout the kernel-smoothed star particles
    kappa_stars = np.zeros(len(m_stars))
    
    # now combine all emissivities, opacities, masses, kernel lengths
    j_all = np.atleast_2d(np.concatenate([j_gas, j_star])).T # 2D because this has shape (num_particles, num_bands) (can have an arbitrary number of bands)
    kappa_all = np.atleast_2d(np.concatenate([kappa_gas, kappa_stars])).T # ditto
    kappa_all = kappa_all.clip(1e-100) # we divide by kappa at a certain point so put this to avoid floating-point errors
    h_all = np.concatenate([hsml, h_star])
    m_all = np.concatenate([mass, m_stars]) 
    x_all = np.concatenate([pos,x_stars],axis=0)
    
    rmax = 10
    res = 1024
    X = Y = np.linspace(-rmax, rmax, res)
    X, Y = np.meshgrid(X, Y, indexing='ij')
    I = radtransfer(j_all, m_all,kappa_all, x_all,h_all,res,2*rmax) # actual call to rad transfer solver
    # screw you I'm not converting this to mag/arcsec^2
    
    fig, ax = plt.subplots(figsize=(6,6))
    p = ax.pcolormesh(X,Y, I[:,:,0], norm=colors.LogNorm(vmin=I.max()/1e3, vmax=I.max()), cmap="Greys_r") 
    ax.set_aspect('equal')
    divider = make_axes_locatable(ax)
    cax = divider.append_axes("right", size="5%", pad=0.0)
    fig.colorbar(p,label=r"$I\,\left(L_\odot\,\rm kpc^{-2}\,\rm sr^{-1}\right)\, $",cax=cax)
    ax.set_xlabel("X (kpc)")
    ax.set_ylabel("Y (kpc)")
    plt.show()




.. image:: MeshoidTest_files/MeshoidTest_11_0.png


Differential Operators
======================

Now let’s play around with Meshoid’s numerical differentiation. Meshoid
can take both first (Meshoid.D) and second derivatives (Meshoid.D2) on
unstructured data, using a kernel-weighted (or unweighted) least-squares
gradient estimator.

As a first sanity check, we can try differentiating the coordinate
functions, with respect to those coordinates. That ought to return an
identity matrix. Note that you can differentiate scalars, vectors, or
even arbitrary tensors that are defined on the meshoid. In general,
differentiating a tensor of rank N will return a tensor of rank N+1.

The first time a given differentiation method is called, Meshoid can
take a minute to compute the weights that it needs. Hang in there,
Meshoid is working diligently and will re-use those weights the next
time you need a derivative!

.. code:: ipython3

    M.D(pos) 




.. parsed-literal::

    array([[[ 1.00000000e+00, -1.56125113e-17,  1.56125113e-17],
            [ 2.25080371e-16,  1.00000000e+00, -2.12069945e-16],
            [ 1.30104261e-16, -3.03576608e-16,  1.00000000e+00]],
    
           [[ 1.00000000e+00, -5.96514483e-17, -1.77402580e-17],
            [-5.62429877e-17,  1.00000000e+00,  8.52725009e-17],
            [ 2.69437792e-16, -8.81591892e-17,  1.00000000e+00]],
    
           [[ 1.00000000e+00,  4.98157017e-17,  4.32874494e-16],
            [ 4.84079329e-17,  1.00000000e+00, -7.06018902e-17],
            [ 4.68917440e-18,  4.95344868e-17,  1.00000000e+00]],
    
           ...,
    
           [[ 1.00000000e+00, -1.60970141e-17, -2.35271871e-17],
            [-3.77099068e-17,  1.00000000e+00,  3.52535113e-17],
            [ 6.46048970e-17, -2.99888627e-16,  1.00000000e+00]],
    
           [[ 1.00000000e+00, -2.06011965e-16,  1.01874347e-16],
            [-2.15403867e-16,  1.00000000e+00,  9.90893023e-17],
            [ 1.01969214e-16,  5.41396355e-16,  1.00000000e+00]],
    
           [[ 1.00000000e+00, -7.45388994e-19, -2.98697699e-17],
            [-2.60208521e-16,  1.00000000e+00, -1.51354623e-16],
            [ 6.80011603e-16, -1.39645240e-16,  1.00000000e+00]]])



OK now let’s look at something physical. Let’s calculate the enstrophy,
which is just the norm squared of the velocity gradient, and plot it as
a slice.

.. code:: ipython3

    gradv = M.D(v)
    enstrophy = np.sum(gradv*gradv, axis=(1,2))
    enstrophy_projection = M.Slice(enstrophy,center=np.array([0,0,0]),size=40.,res=res,order=0)
    fig, ax = plt.subplots(figsize=(6,6))
    p = ax.pcolormesh(X, Y, enstrophy_projection*.979**2, norm=colors.LogNorm(vmin=10,vmax=1e7))
    divider = make_axes_locatable(ax)
    cax = divider.append_axes("right", size="5%", pad=0.0)
    fig.colorbar(p,label=r"Enstrophy $(\rm Gyr^{-2})$",cax=cax)
    ax.set_aspect('equal')
    ax.set_xlabel("X (kpc)")
    ax.set_ylabel("Y (kpc)")
    plt.show()



.. image:: MeshoidTest_files/MeshoidTest_15_0.png

